A discussion of the new dependency code, version 0.3
by Michael Meeks <mmeeks@gnu.org> and Jody Goldberg <jody@gnome.org>

1.     Overview of the Dependencies

	The dependency code is designed to determine which objects depend on
which cells, or regions.  The main use of this is triggering recomputation for
things that depend on something that has changed.  The majority of the code
related to dependencies can be found in module dependent.c.

1.1    Data structures and their meaning

       Dependency data is anchored on a per-sheet basis using GnmDepContainer.
This stores all the dependencies for the sheet in two hash tables.  In the
future other objects may also become containers, such as graphs in their own
tab.

       The two main types of dependencies, are single and range. Loosely
these describe single cells (ie. = A1) vs. regions (ie. = SUM (A1:Z500))
The range_hash and single_hash tables use DependencyRange and DependencySingle
to store lists of Dependents (not necessarily in this container) that depend
on things in the container.  The range_hash table is hashed on the normalized
range, and the other hashes on the GnmCellPos of the singleton.  Sheet does not
come into play because it is implicit in the container.

       DependencySingle stores stores the dependents that rely on individual
cells.  This makes lookup easy.  Only 1 DependencySingle will exist for a given
cell.  We can find that quickly via the hash.

	DependencyRange cannot be searched via the hash.  A target cell may be
contained by several regions.  Finding which regions requires traversing the
list of regions looking for intersections.  See below.

2.     GnmDependent Evaluation

       The routine dependent_eval will evaluate a dependent and if its value
changes it will queue cells that depend on it, these are obtained via
cell_foreach_dep, which looks up in the single_hash and traverses the
range_hash to obtain its result. Often cell recalculation happens through
workbook_recalc which works through each sheets dependents,  re-evaluating
any that are marked for calculation.

2.1    Evaluation queue vs. recursion

       There are two ways in which a cell's recalculation can occur. Firstly
simply traversing the GnmExpr (expr.h) will result in many cells being
evaluated. Essentially each dereference in the GnmExpr (eg. =A1) will cause
the re-calculation of A1's GnmExpr before we can continue (recursively).
This is actually fairly expensive when the expression contains a reference like
    =sum(a1:a65535)

3.     Dependencies the bottleneck

       Since dependencies tend to fan out, and massively increase the area that
needs to be recomputed, it is clearly advantageous to spend time culling the
dependency tree as intelligently as possible. Furthermore since for each cell
that changes it is necessary to determine its dependencies the lookup of
a cell's dependencies needs to be fast.

3.1    Why two methods

       First, consider the case where only range dependencies are used, this
is a fairly simple first implementation. If we have N cells that have
random dependencies on one other cell, then we will have approx N ranges in
the range hash. For each cell we re-calculate we need to iterate over the
entire range hash to determine its dependencies. Hence we have a fundamentally
O(N^2) algorithm, this is very bad news. This scheme spends almost all of its
time in search_cell_deps.

       To overcome this problem we partition dependencies into single cell
dependencies and range dependencies. This way for the common =A1 case, we don't
add an entry in the range_hash, we simply add an entry in the simple_hash.
Hence for the cell_foreach_dep we have one less entry in the range hash to
iterate over, which saves N iterations of search_cell_deps.

	Another common case is having a lot of formulae sharing the same range
in the sheet as a dependency (eg. cutting and pasting = SUM($A$1:$A$100)). In
this case there is a single dependency range entry with many cells listed as its
dependencies.

3.1.1 bucketing range depends

	Searching the list of range depends is still expensive if there are
a lot of them.  eg in the situation where an expression like
    =sum(b1:d1)
is duplicated for the entire 1st column.  We end up with a huge number of
non-overlapping regions to search through.  That can be ameliorated by
bucketing the range depends.  Giving only a few columns to each bucket.

FUTURE : it would be useful to notice that a larger range contains a smaller
one, and to build up a tree as necessary.  This would also decrease the size of
the list.

3.2    Inter-sheet dependencies

       Inter sheet dependencies are managed simply by inserting the dependency
information into the sheet in which the cells that are dependent on reside.
This is essentially exactly what is expected, given that cell's are linked to
the cell they depend on. Removing inter-sheet dependencies is also identical
to normal dependencies, excepting that it is more likely to throw up formulae
that have not been correctly unlinked in a sheet destroy.  As an optimization
we flag inter-sheet and inter-book dependencies.  If we are destroying an entire
sheet or workbook there is no need to be neat and tidy unlinking individual
depends when the whole structure is going to be deleted.

3.3    What is hashed

       While the two hashes (range_hash, simple_hash) are both GHashTables
what is hashed is quite different.

3.3.1  What does the range hash do ?

       The hashing on the range_hash is merely used to determine if there is
already a range in the hash with the same dimensions as a new dependency range
being added. This accelerates insertion of dependencies, the hash is traversed
as a simple un-ordered list at all other times.

3.3.2  Why not a direct Cell * -> set mapping for DependencySingle ?

       This is not done since there is no guarantee that cells that have
dependencies are in existence yet. Hence it is quite valid for A1 to be '=A2'
before A2 exists. If A2 does not exist then A2 has no Cell structure yet. This
could be obviated by creating depended cells, but this would be inelegant.

3.3.3 How are depends stored
	As of 1.1.x we enabled switched from storing lists of dependents in the
DependentSingle and DependentRange.  That was a bottleneck when ensuring
uniqueness if a lot of things depended on the same region directly.  The list
was replaced with a 'microHash'.  A simple hash table that looks like a list
for small sizes.  It is derived from GHashTable in glib, but simplified to make
it lighter weight.

3.4    3D dependencies

	Some expressions depend on the order of the sheets in a workbook.
When linking the expressions we notice this and flag the dependent before
adding it to a collection in the workbook.  The workbook is responsible of
linking and unlinking those dependents when the sheet order changes.

3.5	Named expressions

	Named expressions are special.  In the current implementation we do not
differentiate between names that use relative references and those that don't.
Names cannot be dependents because relative references change value depending
on where they are evaluated.  However, if a sheet is removed we need to know to
invalidate a name that references it.  The 'referencing_names' member of the
collection tracks that.

3.6	Dynamic depends

	Functions like INDEX, INDIRECT and some of the range operators produce
new ranges at run time.  As a result these are not registered when an dependent
is linked.  The DynamicDep structure is a special form of GnmDependent that is
used to collect and remove the dependencies as they get generated.  When a
dependent with dynamic depends is evaluated or unlinked the list is cleared.
The process of evaluation then repopulates the set.

4.     The life cycle of dependency records

	A GnmDependent is 'linked' if its dependencies on other things have been
registered with its container,  and 'unlinked' if not.  Linking takes place by
traversing the expression tree and registering the single, range, and 3d
references.  

4.3.1  Implicit intersection

       This is as yet unimplemented, but will further reduce the number of
ranges to clip against. Essentially an implicit intersection reduces a range
to an adjacent single reference under certain circumstances.

4.3.2  Array Formula

       These luckily have a simple dependency structure, since the formula
stored is identical in each cell, the cells may all depend on the corner cell
using a fast single mapping.

5     Future Expansion

       There are several avenues open for future expansion.

5.1	DependencyRange trees or quad-trees

	Accelerating the range search will give big speedups on large sheets.
The current row based bucketing approach seems to work nicely, but could be
augmented by using trees or quad trees to handle containment better.

5.2    Multi-threading,

       With the current structure, it might well be possible to add multi-
threading support to the evaluation engine. The structure of this would take
advantage of the partitioning already provided by the sheet boundary. To do
this it would be necessary to move the eval_queue to a per-sheet entity, and
putting a locking / signaling mechanism on the queue such that inter-sheet
dependencies could be prepended to the queue (thus ensuring rapid
evaluation), and waited on safely. Since each cell is evaluated but once
per re-calc, it would then be safe to read the Cell's value when it dissappeared
from the eval_queue.

5.3    GnmExpr recursion

       Whether it is always entirely necessary to re-evaluate a cell solely
on the basis that it is in the GnmExpr is non-obvious to me. Clearly if this
cell is in the dependency queue it would make perfect sense, however if there
is as yet no chance that this cell has been changed, it makes little sense
to re-calculate it (and its tree'd dependencies). The only problem here is
determining whether any of the currently queued dependencies would alter this
cell's dependencies.
